**ClassCalculator**

**Recreating the BBC class calculator: A project in open science pedagogy**

The open science movement is a major development across all areas of research over the past several decades. Open science principles have also been applied to teaching and learning, a development sometimes called “open pedagogy” (Hegarty 2015). In this project, we aim to bring the principles of open science to the development of pedagogical tools in the social sciences. Specifically, the goal of this project is to replicate an important teaching tool, the BBC class calculator, using open science principles. This will both extend the lifetime of this tool (currently in the process of “digital decay”) and permit instructors to modify and extend the calculator to pursue different learning objectives. This project relates most directly to the PTAS themes of curriculum innovation and digital teaching. The BBC class calculator is an online tool (currently available here) introduced in 2013 in conjunction with the Great British Class Survey (GBCS) project (for background, see Devine and Snee 2015). The GBCS was an online survey of social class that attracted in excess of 160,000 responses and substantial media coverage. BBC reports and the class calculator itself spawned numerous media and private discussions about the topic of social class, a core issue in the social sciences. The calculator accepts responses to several questions relating to income, assets, social connections and cultural tastes, and classifies respondents into one of seven classes originally inferred from the GBCS database. By returning an up-to-date and sometimes surprising description of users’ social class, the tool leverages users’ familiarity with online surveys and quizzes to promote introspection about and discussion of the topic of social class.

The BBC class calculator is a valuable teaching tool, used both in the University of Edinburgh and in other universities across the UK. We have used it for several years as a part of the curriculum of Sociology 1a, the core first semester sociology course required for on-programme students (also taken by around 400 students as an option every year). The “Social inequalities” unit introduces core concepts in social stratification including different perspectives on social class. During a tutorial session, students take the BBC class survey (reporting either their own information or that of another person of their choosing, such as a parent) and discuss their reaction to the category returned by the calculator. The tutorial is structured to allow students not to disclose their class category if they choose not to. The learning outcomes of this activity include not only teaching students about the core concepts of social class and inequality, but also encouraging them to think critically about why social scientists categorize individuals using class concepts in the first place, and the intersection of theory and empirical research. (As noted below, this second set of learning objectives could be enhanced by extensions to the current class calculator envisaged by the project).

Unfortunately, as noted above, the BBC class calculator appears to be falling victim to “digital decay,” and we expect the tool to eventually disappear from the BBC web page. We encountered technical issues this year in accessing the calculator. Although these issues were resolved, they raised our awareness of the potential loss of this important teaching resource. Prof. Savage and his team own intellectual property rights over the BBC calculator and support this project.

To summarize, the core immediate goal of this project is to replicate the BBC class calculator using opensource software and a distribution system that will allow the calculator to exist in indefinitely without the support of a third-party organization such as the BBC. This will also lay the groundwork for improvements and extensions of the calculator, as discussed below. Replicating the calculator in this way thus becomes, as noted above, an exercise in the application of open science principles to the development of pedagogical tools.

While the primary goal of this project is to replicate the BBC class calculator, a secondary goal is to introduce modifications and extensions. The pedagogical value of the class calculator would be greatly enhanced by allowing users to compare the class categories returned by different class schema. For example, one could compare the results of the 7-category class schema based on the GBCS to the standard NS-SEC categories used by the Office for National Statistics, or the Neo-marixan schema prensent in Wright's work. This would satisfy the pedagogical goal of teaching students about the features of different conceptualizations of social class, encourage critical thinking about classification schema, and facilitate understanding of the intersection between theory and research. Other extensions relate to the demonstration of Shiny as a methodological innovation for social survey construction and presenting it as a viable alternative to other less versatile tools such as Qualitrics.

**Project Members:**

REDACTED FOR PEER REVIEW.

**References:**

Devine, Fiona, and Helene Snee. 2015. “Doing the Great British Class Survey.” The Sociological Review 63(2):240–58.

Hegarty, Bronwyn. 2015. “Attributes of Open Pedagogy: A Model for Using Open Educational Resources.” Educational Technology 55(4):3–13.
